5 Measurements:
		
5.1 Experimental setup

The data acquisition system was tested with measurements on zirconium. This involved the method of polarization spectroscopy, 
the setup of which is described in detail in described in detail in the work by Ch. Bourauel /40/.

For control purposes, the old Z80 data acquisition system was operated in parallel with the new PC data acquisition system in 
order to qualitatively compare the fluorescence signal recorded by both systems. fluorescence signal recorded by both systems.

Fig. 30 shows the overall setup of the experiment.

Fig. 30: Experimental setup

5.2 Test of the new data acquisition system

The new PC data acquisition system was tested by recording the transition from the a 3F3 state to the z 3F3 state of zirconium 
with a wavelength of 6143.20 Å. A total of 10 scans with different scan widths were recorded. Fig. 31 shows the Zr spectrum 
for a scan width of 4 GHz can be seen. The scanning time here was approx. 6 min. For comparison, Fig. 32 shows an already 
evaluated (corrected computer scale) spectrum recorded by the Z80 system /39/. The four even-numbered zirconium isotopes 
(90Zr, 92Zr, 94Zr and 96Zr) and some weakly pronounced Hfs components are clearly visible.

In addition, several scans with a scan width of 800 MHz were recorded in the area of the even isotopes. The scanning time was 
approx. 1.2 min.  

Appendix C shows the recordings of the new and old data acquisition system for comparison.

The measurements were recorded with the following parameter settings:

Discharge parameters:	
Current: 200 mA
Voltage: 700 - 800 V
Pressure: 1 - 1.5 mbar

Lock-in amplifier:
Time constant: 100 ms
Signal amplitude: 400 - 500 mV


Fig. 31: Measured Zr spectrum

Fig. 32: Comparative Zr spectrum ( from /39/)


6. Final remark:

In comparison with the old Z80 measured value acquisition system, the new measured value acquisition system is characterized 
by a reduced susceptibility to interference during measurement operation. There was a clear reduction in the number of 
'outliers' in the fluorescence spectrum, which is due not least to the careful design and adequate shielding of the individual
components. 

The two-computer system concept and the associated separation of tasks during measurement operation also resulted in 
significant advantages:

The subsystem is fully available for measured value acquisition in real time. Since, in comparison to the old Z80 system, 
there is no 'high-level' operating system such as CP/M and the generation of refresh signals for the dynamic memory modules 
(DRAM) is no longer necessary, the programmer has absolute control over the subsystem. Within the framework of the Z80-FORTH
operating system, the programmer can utilize the entire performance of the subsystem.

The new data acquisition system is characterized by its flexibility in measurement operation. Existing program errors or changes
to the program routines only required a switchover to the PC (F1 function key), editing of the program source file and subsequent
loading (LOAD) from the subsystem. 

The various program sections could then be tested individually and checked for functionality. This program development and
testing phase required considerably more time on the old Z80 computer system. In this form, the new two-computer system represents
an ideal program development environment.

The implementation of interrupt-driven measurement routines can be omitted completely in some cases (see FLUOTEST), as long 
as there is no need to react to unforeseen events, but rather to maintain a uniform program flow. 

This is only guaranteed by the fact that the Z80 microprocessor is fully subordinated to the FORTH interpreter and has no 
other tasks to perform.

On the PC side, there are some further possibilities for improving the control and measurement programs, which are discussed 
in Chapter 7.

