3. Description of the hardware:

3.1 Hardware organization

The overall data acquisition system (Fig. 5) is divided into three functional groups:
	* PC - computer
	* Z80 - subcomputer
	* Interface for measurement plug-in units.
  
The IBM PC-XT compatible host computer represents the 'interface' to the user (experimenter) in the data acquisition system. 
It takes over the user guidance and transfers the parameters necessary for controlling the experiment to the Z80 subcomputer. 
In addition to user guidance, the PC computer is also responsible for saving all the data generated during the experiment to 
external data storage media. In 'online' mode (real-time processing of the measurement signals), the data is displayed on the 
screen simultaneously with the acquisition. The PC computer with its high processing speed can be used for additional evaluations. 
By using the parallel PC-subcomputer interface card as well as the serial terminal interface, the operation of the MAS is also 
ensured on a computer of the AT class. The use of a PC-AT computer allows an approximately 2 to 3-fold increase of the computing 
power, with unchanged hardware and software structure.

The principle of the subcomputer was introduced to allow the PC computer to be relieved during time-critical measurements. 
The subcomputer is intended to relieve the PC and be available for direct control of the experiment via the interface bus. 
The operating system (PC-DOS) of the PC computer does not provide any interrupt-driven measurement operation, since the operating 
system itself operates system-internal routines via interrupts. The refreshing of the dynamic random access memory (DRAM) and the 
operation of the hardware clock each require an interrupt (IRQ0 or IRQ1), which have the highest priority in the system. 
This limits the response time of the system. This disadvantage can be countered if a complex operating system is dispensed with
and the system is run at the machine level. In the case of the subsystem based on the Z80 microprocessor, the operating system 
has been replaced by a FORTH program. Since FORTH itself is an operating system and only has to take over the administration 
of the interfaces and the time generation (timer/counter), it is particularly suitable for the subsystem. 

The FIFO concept allows asynchronous data transfer by allowing each of the two computers to operate independently. In dynamic 
operation, the  number of data in the FIFO varies, so that the FIFO acts as a buffer zone between the PC and the subsystem. A
defined communication protocol ensures that no ensures that no character is written to the FIFO if it is already full, and no 
character is read if the FIFO is already empty. The FIFO concept thus guarantees a fast transfer of measurement data between 
subsystem and PC, while the time-uncritical communication (parameter transfer, program development) can be carried out in 
the opposite direction via the serial interface (COM2) in terminal mode.

Fig. 5 : Total measurement acquisition system (MAS)


Interface comparison:

A comparison of the standard interfaces /10/ with the interface used in the input/output bus (IOB) as well as the built-up 
computer coupling (FIFO) gives a first impression of the performance of the data transmission:


1.) V.24:
	Type : serial (1-2 lines)
	Level : '0' = 3..15 V, '1' = -3..-15 V
	Baud rate : 2 ̈10e4 [bit / s].
	stations : 1
	max. length : approx. 30 m
	transmission : asynchronous
	application : computer peripherals


2.) CENTRONICS:
	type : parallel (8 bit, unidirectional)
	level : TTL
	baud rate : 10e6 [bit / s]
	stations : 1
	max. length : approx. 2 m
	transmission : -
	application : printer interface


3.) IEEE-488:
	Type : parallel (8 bit)
	Level : '0' = 5 V, '1' = 0 V
	Baud rate : 2 ̈10e6 [bit / s].
	stations : 15
	max. length : 2..20 m
	transmission : asynchronous
	Application : laboratory automation


4.) IOB:
	Type : parallel (16 bit input, 16 bit output)
	level : TTL
	Baud rate : approx. 4 ̈10e5 [bit / s].
	stations : 256
	max. length : ¾ 10 m
	transmission : synchronous
	Application : data acquisition


5.) FIFO:
	Type : parallel (16 bit input, 8 bit output)
	level : TTL
	Baud rate : approx. 4 ̈10e6 [bit / s].
	stations : 1
	max. length : approx. 2 m
	transmission : asynchronous
	application : computer coupling

The interface to the physical experiment is a universal input/output bus (IOB). A uniform bus structure was realized, 
to which different measuring different measuring inserts can be connected. This bus is managed under the control of 
the Z80 subsystem, which organizes the interaction of the transducers is organized. A stabilized power supply 
( with the voltages: 5 V / 6 A, 12 V / 1 A, 2 x 18 V / 2 A ) supplies both the ECB subsystem and the interface bus. 
The two 18 V lines serve as raw voltage, which is stabilized decentrally to ± 15 V on the respective boards to 
minimize unnecessary interference.

In the following, the individual modules of the MAS are briefly described in their function. For more detailed 
information on the hardware components developed and assembled in-house, please refer to the MAS technical 
documentation /11/. The PC and ECB system components are described in detail in the technical descriptions 
/12, 5/ of the manufacturers.


3.2 PC-XT host computer system

3.2.1 System unit

This is an IBM PC-XT compatible computer with an INTEL-8088 microprocessor, which can be operated with 4.77 MHz 
as well as with 8.0 MHz system clock. The 8088 microprocessor represents the 8-bit version of the 8086/80x86 family
and has an internal 16-bit register architecture. The system clock switching, which corresponds to a factor of 1.7 
in increase of the computing speed, can be initiated by software from the operating system. The minimum instruction 
cycle time at the highest clock rate (8 MHz) is approx. tz = 0.25 μs, so that I/O routines can be implemented at
assembly level in the μs range.

Furthermore, the computer is equipped with 640 kByte (RAM) working memory as well as 32 kByte (EPROM) read-only 
memory for the BIOS operating system.

A numerical coprocessor (8087/8 MHz) connected in parallel to the 8088 main processor allows floating point 
operations to be executed at increased speed. The coprocessor considerably increases the computing speed for 
complex numerical calculations. Depending on the type of machine instructions, the 8087 coprocessor can 
guarantee a speed increase by a factor of 10 to 100.


3.2.2 Graphics

A high-resolution monochrome HERCULES-compatible graphics card with a resolution of 720 x 348 pixels in 
graphics mode and a 25 lines á 80 characters text display drives a 12" EIZO monitor (20 MHz bandwidth). 
In addition to a 64 kB dynamic screen memory, the board also contains a parallel 8-bit CENTRONICS interface (LPT1) 
to which the EPSON FX-100 printer is connected. The large screen memory allows to manage two graphic pages as well 
as one text page at the same time, which proves to be very advantageous during programming, e.g. when different 
spectra are to be displayed and compared with each other.


3.2.3 Mass storage

A hard disk drive of the type NEC 5126 with a total capacity of 32 MByte (average access time approx. 80 ms), 
which supports an increased storage density of the drive due to the use of an RLL controller, and two 5 1/4 inch 
floppy disk drives of the type NEC FD 1255 (1.2 MB storage capacity) and of the type NEC FD 1205 (360 kB storage 
capacity) are available to the system as mass storage.


3.2.4 Multifunction card

In order for the computer to be able to communicate with external peripheral devices, it is necessary to provide 
additional interfaces. This is done with the aid of the multifunction card, which has two serial interfaces 
(COM1 and COM2), an additional parallel interface (LPT2) and three analog inputs (Gameport) are available.

In addition, there is a buffered real-time clock that can be queried by the operating system and automatically
logs the date and time when saving the files. 

With the help of the two serial interfaces according to RS-232 standard, one can connect standard peripheral 
devices such as a plotter (HP 7475A) and an input medium "mouse" (Microsoft compatible) can be connected. In 
the measuring mode, the Z80 laser interface /1/, which controls the Coherent dye laser (COM1), and the ECB 
subcomputer (COM2) are connected to these interfaces.

3.2.5 Subsystem interface board

The data connection from the PC to the Z80 computer, which is designed for high speeds, is made via an asynchronous 
parallel data transfer by means of hardware FIFOs /13/. In contrast to the other PC expansion cards, this interface 
has been developed and built completely in-house. As basis serves a prototype card (wire wrap) from IBM, on which 
the most important PC bus signals are already led out. All data and address lines are buffered, so that they can 
drive several I/O devices. A pre-decoding of the addresses (300-31Fh) has already been made by IBM, so that own 
hardware developments in the I/O area do not conflict with other hardware components or the operating system. 
The board contains four parallel I/O modules (8255 PPI) with a total of 96 I/O lines, as well as two timer 
modules (8253 and 8254) with a total of 6 x 16 bit timers/counters, which have a maximum clock frequency of 
5 and 10 bit, i.e. maximum clock frequency of 5 and 10 MHz respectively /14/. In order to ensure a signal
transmission to the Z80 system which is as insensitive to interference as possible, all are routed via "dual-line" 
drivers or receivers /15/ (Fig. 6), so that interferences which are superimposed on both lines in the same 
direction during the transmission path are compensated at the end of the line.


Fig. 6: Principle of "Dual-Line" signal transmission

Communication is via two main channels, each unidirectional, to enable the highest possible speeds:

BUS-IN:
represents the connection from the Z80- to the PC-system, on which the measurement data are received in the 
experiment. Because of the high amount of data this channel is 16 bit wide. Since additional control lines 
are added, the BUS-IN is 50-pole and is led to the PC system via ribbon cable (max. 2 meters) to the PC system.

BUS-OUT:
represents the connection from the PC to the Z80 system, on which e.g. the commands and initial parameters, 
which are entered by the user, are sent. Since this part of the communication is not time-critical, this 
channel was designed to be only 8 bits wide. Also here additional control lines are needed, so that the 
BUS-OUT needs 34 poles, which are led over ribbon cables as above.

To further increase the noise immunity, the inexpensive ribbon cables can be replaced by more expensive 
"twisted pairs" cables, which provide a better shielding. provide a better shielding. The inputs and 
outputs of the two timers are connected to wrap sockets on the wire-wrap card and are led out at the 
rear computer housing. The programming of the I/O devices and timers can be done in 8088 assembler as
well as directly in a high level language (e.g. Turbo Pascal, FORTH, C).

The following page (Fig. 7) shows the structure of the parallel PC-subcomputer interface board.

Fig. 7: Subcomputer interface card

3.2.6 IEEE-488 Card

Newer commercial measuring instruments often already have an interface for connection to a computer system. 
This is the standardized 8-bit parallel IEEE-488 standard interface, which allows several measuring 
instruments to be operated on one bus. The number of remote stations is limited to 15. Each device has 
an address and communicates with the computer via "3-wire handshake" /16/. A distinction is made between 
the following possibilities for connecting a measuring instruments:

  * LISTENER : receives information from the computer
	* TALKER : supplies the computer with information
	* LISTENER & TALKER : bidirectional information exchange with the connected computer.

The IEEE-488 card is an HP-IB interface card from Hewlett-Packard /16/. With the help of this card it
is possible to connect e.g. to control the following measuring instruments under PC control:

	- TEKTRONIX storage oscilloscope,
	- EG&G Lock-In Amplifier,
	- FLUKE digital voltmeter,
	- etc.

The instruments can be programmed under BASIC, Pascal or C using the libraries supplied. The commercial 
program package for measurement data acquisition ASYST /17/ also allows a comfortable and user-friendly 
operation of the devices connected to the IEEE-488 bus, since IEEE control programs (FORTH words) already exist.

The pulse diagrams of the measuring program FLUOTEST recorded in chapter 5 with the storage oscilloscope 
(TEKTRONIX, model 2230) were read out under ASYST with the aid of the IEEE-488 card under ASYST. With the 
help of a plot program developed by C. Schwarzwald /18/, the figures Fig. 24 and Fig. 25 were plotted on an HP-7475A plotter.

Fig. 8: IEEE-488 instrument bus concept (from /16/)

3.3 Z80-ECB subcomputer system

3.3.1 CPU-IV board

The main computer card used in the laboratory is the CPU-IV card from Janich & Klass. The Z80-A NMOS microprocessor (4 MHz) 
used can be replaced by a CMOS type, which is particularly suitable for use in a subcomputer system due to its low 
power consumption. With this timing problems caused by refreshing the dynamic memories (DRAM) do not occur, the board contains 
32 kB of static RAM (4 x 6264 SRAM, 150 ns access time). The actual FORTH operating system kernel is located in a fixed 
memory (27256 EPROM), which is also 32 kB in size. 
As additional I/O components, the board contains two parallel interfaces (Z80-PIO) with a total of four 8-bit ports, 
as well as a timer/counter (Z80-CTC) with four 8 bit counters each. A buffered real time clock (RTC), which can be 
accessed via one port of the parallel devices, allows to set the time on the subsystem independently of the PC computer. 
The programming of the Z80 peripheral modules is described in detail in the data sheets /13, 19/. 


3.3.2 Slave CPU card

In the test phase of the MES, the subcomputer was operated with the slave processor card SUB-S from the company 
Oettle & Reichler /20/. In this test phase the FORTH operating system developed in the electronics workshop of
K.D. Krause /21/ was implemented and tested. The communication to the PC was done via a bidirectional serial 
interface (RS-232), so that commands were sent from the PC to the Z80 and vice versa via this connection. The 
data transfer rate was max. 9600 baud (approx. 1000 characters per second).

In contrast to the CPU-IV, this CPU card contains a serial block (Z80-SIO) instead of two parallel I/O blocks
(Z80-PIO) as well as a timer/counter block (Z80-CTC). The timer is used for baud rate generation and "watchdog" 
circuitry. The "watchdog" circuit ensures ensures error-free operation of the processor board by periodically 
resetting one channel of the timer. Should this reset fail to occur, the device triggers a non-maskable interrupt 
(NMI) at the microprocessor and the system is reinitialized. The CMOS technology Z80 microprocessor is operated 
at a clock rate of 3.99 MHz, thus guaranteeing a high processing speed. The memory layout (32 kB SRAM, 32 kB EPROM) 
and the organization of the FORTH operating system were otherwise the same as on the CPU-IV board, which 
subsequently allowed a fast implementation.


3.3.3 Serial interface card

To enable simple terminal operation between the PC computer and the subsystem, it was necessary to equip the 
subcomputer with at least one serial interface (RS-232). A second serial interface should also be available, 
since it seemed to make sense for future measuring programs to use the intelligent laser interface /1/ directly 
from the Z80 subsystem. The serial interface card SIC 2.0 of the company E-LAB /22/ with a total of three 
serial modules (Z80-SIO and Z80-DART) was selected for this purpose. A Z80-CTC module provides the clock 
signal for the required baud rate of 9600. The six channels of the three SIO modules are connected to
nine-pin connectors (DSUB) at the front interface housing. The number of RS-232 connection lines to the 
host system has been kept to a minimum. Beside the signal ground (Gnd) there is only one line for
transmitting (TxD) and for receiving (RxD) data.

3.3.4 Timer card

The timer card corresponds to the timer card of the old Z80-MES in its design and structure. A complete compatibility
was aimed at consciously, to be able to test it in the Z80-CP/M computer during the test phase on the one hand, 
and on the other hand to guarantee a direct replacement in case of failure of one of the cards in laboratory operation. 
(base address : 30h). For a detailed description of the timer card, please refer to the work of U. Urmoneit /2/.

The task of this card in the measuring mode is the exact time control of the experiment sequence, which is achieved 
by prioritized vector interrupts /5/ of the four counter components (Z80-CTC). These counters open and close according 
to a precise timing scheme, depending on the respective measuring program, the counters (gate) for the signals to be
recorded (e.g. fluorescence and calibration mark signal) and cause the intelligent Z80 laser interface to control the 
dye laser in scan mode in discrete steps. The four timer modules connected in series allow the generation of time 
intervals in a range from 4 μs to approx. 2̈105 d. The timing scheme of the measurement in the FLUOTEST test program 
is explained in detail in Chapter 4.


3.3.5 FIFO card

The FIFO card of the subcomputer system contains the FIFO's and the logic blocks required to control them. The FIFO 
components (Zilog Z8038FIO, /23/) have an eight-bit wide and 128-byte deep data buffer and enable asynchronous computer
coupling (Fig. 9) between the PC host computer and the Z80 subcomputer. In the Z80 system, the FIFOs are addressed directly 
via the system-internal data bus like I/O modules, on the PC side they communicate with two parallel modules (8255 PPI) 
of the PC wrap card via two "handshake" lines each. While the BUS-IN channel, as already mentioned, has a width of 
16 bits wide because of the high data rate and therefore requires two FIFO devices (FIO1 and FIO2), the BUS-OUT channel 
is limited to eight bits (FIO3) wide. The control of the FIFO's is done by the parallel blocks of both systems. 
After the FIFOs have been automatically reset (RESET) at Z80 system startup (RESET), they must be initialized and 
programmed into the correct operating mode. Under software control it is possible at any time possible to clear their 
data buffer (CLEAR) and to query whether their data buffer is empty (EMPTY) or full (FULL). The maximum data transfer 
rate of the FIFO blocks is 1 MHz (=106 words/s). The time required for a word to pass through the data buffer is 
approximately tr = 250 ns. The FIFO devices are capable of triggering seven differently prioritized Z80 vector 
interrupts, thus offering a wide range of operating possibilities. More details on programming this device can
be found in the Zilog data sheet /23/.

Fig. 9: FIFO computer coupling (PC <-> subcomputer)

3.3.6 FIFO driver card

The counterpart to the PC parallel card (prototype wire-wrap) is the FIFO driver card in the Z80 subsystem. 
For reasons of space and to ensure better heat dissipation, the line drivers and the line drivers and receivers /15/
are placed on a separate card. On this card, the two ribbon cables BUS-IN and BUS-OUT from the PC computer system 
are fed in and short-circuited against signal reflections via the five Wi (100 Û) resistor arrays (Fig. 6). 
The board contains a total of six line drivers (SN75172) and four line receivers (SN75173). All signals from 
the PC system are fed to the FIFO card via a 50-pin ribbon cable. 


3.3.7 PIO card

The connection from the subcomputer to the interface bus (IOB) is made by means of the PIO card from 
Janich & Klass /5/. This card also corresponds in its the PIO wrap card of the old Z80 data acquisition system, 
and is identical in the address assignment (base address : 60h), so that they can be directly against each other
in laboratory operation. Via four parallel I/O modules (Z80-PIO) the data stream from the experiment to the MAS 
(16 DATA-IN) and from the MES to the experiment (16 DATA-OUT), as well as all eight control signals (CONTROL) 
and the eight address signals (ADDRESS) to the measuring modules.

Since all eight address lines can be decoded, it is possible to address a maximum of 256 measuring modules. 
Since this is currently not necessary in laboratory operation, only the four upper bits (ADR4 to ADR7) are 
decoded, so that now 16 different measuring modules can be addressed.


3.3.8 PIO driver card

So that the interface bus is not overloaded by the connected measuring modules and can also control them without 
errors, it must be buffered. Unidirectional buffer modules (74LS244) ensure that up to 60 TTL loads can be safely 
operated at one output. All signals from the subcomputer to the experiment (DATA-OUT, CONTROL, ADDRESS) are amplified 
via this board. The DATA-IN channel is driven on each corresponding card, on which the signal is recorded, if this 
is necessary. For the two counter cards used, latches (74HC374) buffer of the signals. The PIO driver card,
which is located on the interface bus, is connected to the PIO card.


3.4 Interface system

According to the requirements the interface system allows by its universal design to connect different measuring 
modules and interface cards. The interface bus (IOB) is led out on a 64-pole VG strip in the upper part of the 
housing, on which 25 slots are located. The bus is divided into the following main logical groups:

	- DATA-IN bus (16 lines : DI0...DI15)
	- DATA-OUT bus (16 lines : DO0...DO15)
	- ADDRESS Bus (8 lines : ADR0...ADR7)
	- CONTROL Bus (8 lines : CTRL0...CTRL7)
	- Power supplies : + 5 V (6A), ± 18 V (2A)

This definition of the bus is identical with the bus extension of the old Z80 data acquisition system as described 
in /3/, and thus permits thus a simultaneous use of all measuring modules and interface cards at both systems.

The following page shows the schematic diagram (Fig. 10) of the interface unit, which is divided into input (BUS-IN) 
and output channels (BUS-OUT). The data flow is controlled by the control bus (CONTROL), the selection of the measuring 
modules is done by the address bus (ADDRESS). A bus termination of the DATA-IN bus pulls all 16 lines to ground via 
resistor arrays (2.2 kÛ), so that defined input levels are guaranteed.

Fig. 10: Subcomputer system and interface bus (IOB)

3.4.1 VFC card

Since the principle of voltage/frequency conversion has proven itself in laboratory operation, the same principle was 
used here as already in the old Z80-MAS was used.

The VFC card (Voltage-to-Frequency-Converter) makes it possible to convert analog input variables into digital signal 
variables. The analog input voltage is converted into a corresponding frequency (TTL level). This conversion is linear 
in the working range of the VFC (characteristic curve). The  circuitry of the voltage/frequency converter is shown in Fig. 11. 
The VFC receives its negative input via an operational amplifier (OP) connected as an inverting amplifier. The VFC receives
its negative input voltage. The offset (P1) and the gain (P2) can be adjusted externally at the operational amplifier 
via two potentiometers. The VFC board contains two separate channels, one for the fluorescence signal (Uin = 0..10 V), 
the other for the calibration mark signal (Uin = 0..2 V). The external circuitry of the VFC's is designed for a maximum
output frequency fout of 1 MHz. Fig. 12 and Fig. 13 show the linear progression of the characteristics 
(dependence of the output frequency fout on the input voltage Uin) of the two channels can be clearly seen.

Fig. 14 shows the frequency deviation ⌂f = fmax - fmin of the calibration mark channel as a function of the gain set 
at potentiometer P2. With a fixed set offset value of P1 = 9.7 [skt], a maximum frequency deviation ⌂f of approx. 221 [kHz] 
results for the amplification P2 = 5.0 [skt]. The input voltage was kept constant at Uin = 2 V. In order to shield the 
sensitive VFC analog components as far as possible from external interference, the setup was mounted on a "ground plane" 
board (continuous ground plane on the upper side of the board).

The ± 15 V supply voltages for the OPs and VFCs were generated directly on the board in order to keep the interface 
bus-side raw voltages ± 18 V largely unaffected by external interferences.

More detailed circuit information and operating parameters can be taken from the data sheets of the company Burr-Brown /24/.

Fig. 11: Circuit diagram VFC card

Fig. 12: VFC characteristic curve fluorescence input

Fig. 13: VFC characteristic curve for calibration mark input

Fig. 14: VFC frequency deviation of the calibration mark input

3.4.2 TTL counter card

The counter card contains two counter channels (á 32 bit) each, which allow to record count rates up to a maximum of 
232-1 (=4,294,967,295). The input signal is linked to the gate signal via an AND gate (74LS08) to activate the counters 
for fixed time periods. The four series-connected counter components (74HC393, high-speed CMOS) allow a maximum input 
frequency of 100 MHz. Via the four latches (74HC374), the count rates are read out in parallel and forwarded to the DATA-IN bus.

Depending on the measurement program used, the gate signal of the fluorescence channel (GATE1) and the gate signal of the 
calibration mark channel (GATE2) are set or cleared by the subcomputer. The two latch signals (LATCH1, LATCH2) trigger the 
transfer of the count rates into the latch buffer. Since the input data bus (DATA-IN) is only designed for 16 bit width, 
two accesses must be made to read in a 32 bit count rate. The addressing of the low value (LOW) is done with the Enable-LOW signal,
the higher value (HIGH) with the Enable-HIGH signal. The addressing of the counter card on the IOB bus is done by a comparator
circuit (74LS85). Here, the four address bits (A4, A5, A6, A7) present on the upper IOB bus are addressed by setting four 
DIP-switch' switches. If they are equal, the lower address bits A0 and A1 enable the LOW and HIGH values of the counters
to be addressed respectively.

On this board, the base address is set to 10h. After the count rates have been read, the clear signals (CLEAR1, CLEAR2) 
clear the corresponding counter channels and prepare the counter for recording the next data. The timing of the control 
signals necessary for recording count rates is shown on the following page of Fig. 15. The circuit diagram of the 
counter board can be seen in Fig. 16.

Fig. 15: Timing diagram of the counter cards

Fig. 16: Circuit diagram of TTL counter card

3.4.3 ECL counter card

The ECL counter card is similar in principle to the TTL counter card just described. In contrast to the TTL counter card, 
the first counting stage is in ECL technology. (Emitter-Coupled-Logic) in order to be able to resolve counting events with 
very short time intervals (up to approx. 10 ns). With the help of this card it is possible to record the pulses of the
photomultiplier, which are processed to standard pulses by a discriminator (photon counting). ECL circuits are characterized 
by very short gate propagation times ( ¾ 5 ns), but have different logic levels than TTL devices. Therefore it is necessary 
to compare the two TTL input signals for the first counter stage (MC10154) by means of a TTL/ECL converter (MC10124). 
For the subsequent TTL counters a new level conversion is necessary. This is done with the help of the ECL/TTL 
converter (MC10125). The timing diagram corresponds to that of the TTL counter card (Fig. 15). The base address 
of the ECL counter is 20h. Fig. 16 shows the structure of the ECL counter card.

Fig. 17: Structure of the ECL counter card

3.4.4 High-frequency decade interface

A module for controlling the SCHOMANDL frequency decade /26/ used in high-frequency spectroscopy /25/ was designed and built. 
Here the possibility of the external control of the individual places of the decade in the BCD code was used. In order to 
communicate a frequency value of the decade over the computer the ten decade digits must be transferred individually. With
ten digits, a total of 40 lines is required when using the BCD coding.To save control lines, the multiplex principle was used. 
With four data lines (DATA0 - DATA3) the digits 0 to 9 and with four address lines (ADR0 - ADR3) decode the 10 decimal places.
An intermediate memory (register A) allows to fill up the digits one after the other, and afterwards to the frequency 
decade (register B). The two control signals ADR-Valid and DATA-Valid enable the transfer of the single digits or the 
complete frequency value to the decade. The control is done with TTL level in negative logic. If the frequency decade is 
is in the remote mode, it holds the frequency value contained in register B. So that the decade and the computer do not 
have to be in the immediate vicinity of each other in the laboratory, an approx. 5 meter long 50 Ohms coaxial line was 
set up via line drivers. This allows interference-free data transmission between the data acquisition system and experiment.

The time course of the input signals at the decade interface for the transmission of a complete frequency value can be seen
in Fig. 18. In Fig. 19 the block diagram of the high frequency decade interface can be seen.

Fig. 18: Timing diagram of the decade interface

Fig. 19: Block diagram of high-frequency decade interface

