Appendix

A.  Block diagrams / Circuit diagrams
B.  Assembly diagrams / terminal assignments
C.  Measured spectra
D.  Evaluation programs


Appendix A:   Block diagrams / schematics

Appendix B:   Assembly diagrams / terminal assignments

Appendix C:   Measured spectra

Appendix D:   Evaluation programs



For the evaluation of Hfs measurements the following programs are available on the PC:

HFSFIT:  
This program represents the PC version of the HFSFIT program already successfully used on the IBM3081.
Under the condition, that the corresponding transitions (Fu, Fo) have already been assigned to the 
measured lines (Ei, ⌂Ei), the program calculates the A and B factors for the corresponding FS transition. 
The program generates parameter files (*.PAR) for the subsequent spectrum simulation with the programs 
HFSSPEK or SPEKTRUM.
( Batch file : HF.BAT )

HFSSPEK:
This program calculates the Hfs spectrum of an odd isotope (e.g.: 51V).
( Batchfile : HSPEK.BAT )

SPEKTRUM:
This program calculates the spectrum of an odd isotope (ex: 91Zr) and max. six other even isotopes 
(ex: 90Zr, 92Zr, 94Zr and 96Zr).
( Batch file : SPEK.BAT )

ISOTOP:
This program calculates the Hfs spectrum of two odd isotopes (Hfs splitting of both isotopes).
( Batchfile : ISO.BAT )

ISOTOPG:
This program calculates the spectrum of two odd isotopes (e.g.: 95Mo, 97Mo) and max. six 
further even isotopes (e.g.: 92Mo, 94Mo, 96Mo, 98Mo and 100Mo).
( Batch file : ISOG.BAT )


A detailed description of the program operations as well as the source files of all modules 
necessary for the function of the above programs can be found in /38/.



Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Prof. Dr. S. Penselin for the opportunity to do this work at the Institute of Applied Physics.

I would like to thank Prof. Dr. S. Büttgenbach for the interesting topic of the thesis.

I am especially grateful to Dipl.-Phys. W. Rupprecht, Dipl.-Phys. T. Brenner and Mr. W. Gutsch for their continuous help 
in the execution of the work. the work as well as for the numerous stimulating discussions.

I would also like to thank the staff of the electronics workshop, especially Dipl.-Ing. K.D. Krause for the extremely 
helpful support during the MAS development, especially during the implementation of the FORTH systems.

